app/posts/2015-08-15-buying-software.md, before:

---
title: "Buying Software is not Buying Software Services"
author:
  name: "Todd Kaufman"
  url: "http://twitter.com/toddkaufman"
reddit: false
---

I get to talk to a lot of people about what we do at Test Double and I’m constantly amazed by the number of interesting and unique challenges that face businesses from different industries. It seems like there should be off-the-shelf solutions for most of what people need after 40 or so years of commercial software sales, but existing solutions often don’t have the required features, they raise support concerns, or they require extensive customization to meet the needs of business customers. Companies then turn to agencies like ours, for a custom software solution.

Unfortunately, many companies use the same mindset for buying services that they would when purchasing packaged software (or pencils or staplers or other commodity products). This mindset can negatively impact the endeavor at every step along the way; leading buyers to select the wrong vendor, inhibit collaborative relationships, and build custom software that's _still_ a poor match for their needs. 

Because most businesses will go years between major custom software initiatives, it shouldn't come as a shock that few will have learned through experience how to build a successful partnership with a software services company. Meanwhile, as an agency, we're a part of this process dozens of times a year, albeit from the other side of the table. Here are a few of the pitfalls we see buyers run into and some of the advice we frequently give prospective clients to avoid them:

> ToddNote: I'm breaking these up into subheaders because they're long and will be easier to read with whitespace intermixed

## Forcing a delivery date

When companies build a building or manufacture an item, they do so because there's no way to copy-paste physical things into existence. If that were possible, we'd see far fewer construction projects. Short of that, since most buildings and items have been fabricated many times previously, when companies build those things they can at least approach the project with a commodity mindset—costs can be compared and firm delivery dates can be predicted accurately.

Because it's so easy to analogize writing software to building physical things, we often forget that its intangible nature means we _can_ just copy-paste existing software. That fact eliminates the need for routine "construction projects", which have greatly informed how businesses practice project management. As a result, whenever anyone undertakes a custom software project, it's only because the software they need _has never been built before_. As opposed to fabricating a familiar physical item, custom software must be approached with a creative, open-ended mindset—costs can vary dramatically and delivery dates of fixed-functionality can't be estimated reliably.

If the problem a customer is trying to solve is already well understood, then the chances are that they can find something off-the-shelf that will do what they want. They won’t have much need for a firm like ours in that case. Assuming that what they need is actually is unique, then it is difficult at best for us to forecast when exactly everything they initially wanted will be done. The very uniqueness of the problem that drives clients to buying our services in the first place is the same thing that limits our ability to tell clients explicitly when we’ll be done. Instead, we try to guide our clients to focus on minimizing scope, reducing complexity, and eliminating risk throughout the process. By working iteratively in the open and communicating continuously, our creative process enables us to gradually narrow in on a realistic delivery date as the software is written.

## Fixing scope

Most companies start custom software projects with the wrong question. They ask first, “What things might we want this software to accomplish?”. Many people may see no issue with this question, but the devil is in the ambiguity. When we ask our business stakeholders and end users what all of the possible things are that this software can do, we get a response that is much more swiss army knife than a screw driver. And when we don’t refine the scope from all possibilities down to must have essentials, we typically produce software that is expensive, difficult to maintain, and very hard to use. See Sharepoint if you want a good example. Brainstorming about possible features with end users is a valuable activity, but assuming that all of the features discussed on day 1 are essential is a recipe for disaster. At Test Double we strive to condense massive amounts of features down to a minimum viable product. Separate the features down into mandatory, nice to have, and not going to happen for first release, with each group having similar amounts of scope. Get the software released and then start relentlessly soliciting user feedback to determine the next steps for your software. What you think is most valuable is not often what your users think is most valuable, leverage their feedback in the shaping of your product.

## Thinking only of today

Many clients tend to think that getting software into production is the finish line. Unfortunately, up to 80% of the cost of software development occurs beyond initial release. Many companies start to see defects, longer turnaround time on new features, and scalability concerns shortly after initial release. They view these issues as irreparable so they blindly rewrite applications that have been deemed “legacy” after only a few years. If software service consumers want to focus on reducing the cost of software delivery, wouldn’t they be better served  by elminating legacy rewrites and reducing the overall maintenance cost instead of focusing on the bill rate of the developers writing version 1? The challenge is that maintainability of the solution is probably the most difficult thing to evaluate when choosing a partner for your software development efforts. We usually write a lot of automated tests and strive for simplicity in the solutions that we create. This effort takes time in the near term but results in an end solution that is generally better able to withstand the future needs of end users. Additionally, we spend time making sure that you have a plan for the maintenance of your application. If that means training or pairing with your developers on the solutions that we create, then we’ll do it to ensure a smooth transition into the maintenance phase. Finding a vendor that focuses on the transition plan to your staff for maintenance is key in ensuring a viable long term solution.

## Purchasing based on cost. 

When purchasing pencils, then it may make sense to base that purchase on the lowest cost per pencil. Pencils are, after all, fairly similar in regards to quality, efficiency, ease of use, and general value for the dollar. Software developers, however, are not. When procuring custom software development services, you are in essence buying software developers which vary wildly in quality, efficiency, ease of use. and general value for the dollar. Evaluating the level of developers is hard, we spend a lot of time doing it. People have touted and disputed the 10x developer, but what we have experienced is that there are developers who are much better than others at building custom software. Really exceptional developers know when to challenge product owners on the features being discussed, when to evaluate alternative solutions to problems that aren’t being discussed. When to absorb the cost of adopting a new technology in order to reduce the overall cost of the projects. When to spend the extra time refactoring a solution that doesn’t seem to be clear enough to maintain. Identifying the types of developers that excel at solving these problems is really hard, we encourage all of our clients to spend the time talking to our team so that they have a level of trust that we are the best firm for their problem. Further we’d love if they talked to current and past clients about what it is like working with us on a day to day basis so that they understand that our cost may be higher but so is our value.

## Conflating "faster" and "better".

Procuring custom software development is a challenging process and one that shouldn’t be undertaken blindly based using an RFP or other disconnected process. Hopefully companies realize that the mistakes above can be avoided by spending some time working with custom software agencies to establish trust and a greater understanding of how they work.

DISCLAIMER: We’d appreciate any opportunity to talk to clients about their custom software needs, we’ll confidently refer you elsewhere if we don’t believe Test Double is right fit for your organization.

Commit message:

Take a pass at fixing scope, adding some newlines

app/posts/2015-08-15-buying-software.md, after:

---
title: "Buying Software is not Buying Software Services"
author:
  name: "Todd Kaufman"
  url: "http://twitter.com/toddkaufman"
reddit: false
---

I get to talk to a lot of people about what we do at Test Double and I’m constantly amazed by the number of interesting and unique challenges that face businesses from different industries. It seems like there should be off-the-shelf solutions for most of what people need after 40 or so years of commercial software sales, but existing solutions often don’t have the required features, they raise support concerns, or they require extensive customization to meet the needs of business customers. Companies then turn to agencies like ours, for a custom software solution.

Unfortunately, many companies use the same mindset for buying services that they would when purchasing packaged software (or pencils or staplers or other commodity products). This mindset can negatively impact the endeavor at every step along the way; leading buyers to select the wrong vendor, inhibit collaborative relationships, and build custom software that's _still_ a poor match for their needs. 

Because most businesses will go years between major custom software initiatives, it shouldn't come as a shock that few will have learned through experience how to build a successful partnership with a software services company. Meanwhile, as an agency, we're a part of this process dozens of times a year, albeit from the other side of the table. Here are a few of the pitfalls we see buyers run into and some of the advice we frequently give prospective clients to avoid them:

> ToddNote: I'm breaking these up into subheaders because they're long and will be easier to read with whitespace intermixed

## Forcing a delivery date

When companies build a building or manufacture an item, they do so because there's no way to copy-paste physical things into existence. If that were possible, we'd see far fewer construction projects. Short of that, since most buildings and items have been fabricated many times previously, when companies build those things they can at least approach the project with a commodity mindset—costs can be compared and firm delivery dates can be predicted accurately.

Because it's so easy to analogize writing software to building physical things, we often forget that its intangible nature means we _can_ just copy-paste existing software. That fact eliminates the need for routine "construction projects", which have greatly informed how businesses practice project management. As a result, whenever anyone undertakes a custom software project, it's only because the software they need _has never been built before_. As opposed to fabricating a familiar physical item, custom software must be approached with a creative, open-ended mindset—costs can vary dramatically and delivery dates of fixed-functionality can't be estimated reliably.

If the problem a customer is trying to solve is already well understood, then the chances are that they can find something off-the-shelf that will do what they want. They won’t have much need for a firm like ours in that case. Assuming that what they need is actually is unique, then it is difficult at best for us to forecast when exactly everything they initially wanted will be done. The very uniqueness of the problem that drives clients to buying our services in the first place is the same thing that limits our ability to tell clients explicitly when we’ll be done. Instead, we try to guide our clients to focus on minimizing scope, reducing complexity, and eliminating risk throughout the process. By working iteratively in the open and communicating continuously, our creative process enables us to gradually narrow in on a realistic delivery date as the software is written.

## Fixing scope

Most companies start custom software projects with the wrong question. They ask first, “What things might we want this software to accomplish?”. Many people may see no issue with this question, but the devil is in the ambiguity. 

When we ask our business stakeholders and end-users for a list of every possible thing that some software should do, we get a response that is much more swiss army knife than screwdriver. And when we don’t refine the scope from all possibilities down to must-have essentials, we typically produce software that is expensive, difficult to maintain, and very hard to use. (See Sharepoint if you want a good example.) Brainstorming about possible features with end-users is a valuable activity, but assuming that all of the features discussed on day 1 are essential is a recipe for disaster. 

At Test Double, we work with customers to distill long lists of desired features into the core essentials in order to arrive at a minimum viable product. While we have a lot of tricks up our sleeve for identifying the most valuable aspects of a prospective system, it can be as simple as forcing ourselves to categorize features into critical, nice-to-have, and distraction buckets. Starting with only the critical features, the software is released very early on, and the team starts relentlessly soliciting user feedback to help determine what should be worked on next. What businesses initially predict will be the most valuable features often differ greatly from users' perspectives once they start using real, working software. As a result, adopting a process designed to leverage users' feedback is a necessary part of building valuable software.

> ToddNote: I wrote this line thinking about the above but it probably doesn't fit: "Once businesses are able to receive authentic feedback about their software, we find they usually spend more time refining the top two or three features than sweating the completion of requirement bullet point #43 from a (long-since forgotten) initial design doc."

## Thinking only of today

Many clients tend to think that getting software into production is the finish line. Unfortunately, up to 80% of the cost of software development occurs beyond initial release. Many companies start to see defects, longer turnaround time on new features, and scalability concerns shortly after initial release. They view these issues as irreparable so they blindly rewrite applications that have been deemed “legacy” after only a few years. If software service consumers want to focus on reducing the cost of software delivery, wouldn’t they be better served  by elminating legacy rewrites and reducing the overall maintenance cost instead of focusing on the bill rate of the developers writing version 1? The challenge is that maintainability of the solution is probably the most difficult thing to evaluate when choosing a partner for your software development efforts. We usually write a lot of automated tests and strive for simplicity in the solutions that we create. This effort takes time in the near term but results in an end solution that is generally better able to withstand the future needs of end users. Additionally, we spend time making sure that you have a plan for the maintenance of your application. If that means training or pairing with your developers on the solutions that we create, then we’ll do it to ensure a smooth transition into the maintenance phase. Finding a vendor that focuses on the transition plan to your staff for maintenance is key in ensuring a viable long term solution.

## Purchasing based on cost. 

When purchasing pencils, then it may make sense to base that purchase on the lowest cost per pencil. Pencils are, after all, fairly similar in regards to quality, efficiency, ease of use, and general value for the dollar. Software developers, however, are not. When procuring custom software development services, you are in essence buying software developers which vary wildly in quality, efficiency, ease of use. and general value for the dollar. Evaluating the level of developers is hard, we spend a lot of time doing it. People have touted and disputed the 10x developer, but what we have experienced is that there are developers who are much better than others at building custom software. Really exceptional developers know when to challenge product owners on the features being discussed, when to evaluate alternative solutions to problems that aren’t being discussed. When to absorb the cost of adopting a new technology in order to reduce the overall cost of the projects. When to spend the extra time refactoring a solution that doesn’t seem to be clear enough to maintain. Identifying the types of developers that excel at solving these problems is really hard, we encourage all of our clients to spend the time talking to our team so that they have a level of trust that we are the best firm for their problem. Further we’d love if they talked to current and past clients about what it is like working with us on a day to day basis so that they understand that our cost may be higher but so is our value.

## Conflating "faster" and "better".

Procuring custom software development is a challenging process and one that shouldn’t be undertaken blindly based using an RFP or other disconnected process. Hopefully companies realize that the mistakes above can be avoided by spending some time working with custom software agencies to establish trust and a greater understanding of how they work.

DISCLAIMER: We’d appreciate any opportunity to talk to clients about their custom software needs, we’ll confidently refer you elsewhere if we don’t believe Test Double is right fit for your organization.
