app/posts/2017-04-03-the-a11y-for-all.md, before:

---
title: "Accessibility For One - Accessibility For All"
author:
  name: "Sam Jones"
  url: "http://twitter.com/samjonester"
reddit: false
---

Our goal when creating an accessible experience is to ensure that users with [vision, auditory, motor, or cognitive disabilities][disabilities] are able to navigate all web content. Accessibility guidelines exist to eliminate barriers that would otherwise provide equal access to a [significant percentage][ada-census] of the population. The great thing about following accessibility guidelines is that techniques have an impact on **all** users. Getting started with accessibility is easy, and any action you take benefits users now!

## Accessibility Benefits Everyone

While accessibility techniques are extremely advantageous to people with disabilities, the techniques have a much wider impact. Here are some examples of how accessibility techniques can impact a much broader user base.

- Ensuring navigation is possible for users that are [unable to use a mouse][keyboard-accessibility] also means that power users are able to keep our hands planted on the keyboard.
- Increasing the size of touch targets to [support unsteady hands][motor-accessibility] also supports a one-handed parent who is trying to purchase your product while making a bottle.
- Using [semantic web elements][semantic-accessibility] to provide more context to screen readers also provides that same context to search engine spiders, and to the development team maintaining the content.
- Using contrast to convey differences in addition to color ensures that users with [visual disabilities][visual-accessibility] are able to discern content. It also means that users viewing the content on a phone in the sun can discern the content as well.
- Providing textual representations of audio and video content means that the content is searchable.
- Ensuring that text can be resized for users with [visual disabilities][visual-accessibility] means that it can also be shared during a meeting or within a screen share.

In addition to this list, improving accessibility specifically for users with [cognitive disabilities][cognitive-accessibility] has very wide-reaching value.
- Navigation that is simple and consistent makes content more discoverable to **all** users.
- Clear, focused, consistent messaging is valuable marketing.
- Avoiding distractions and using white space to focus attention creates a deeper and more memorable impression.

## Accessibility is a Spectrum

> Accessibility isn't a badge. It's not a checklist of equally weighted dos and don'ts.

Have you held off on "adding accessibility" to a web site or UI component, for fear that you're not an accessibility expert? Don't hold back! Each action taken will have an impact. As you learn about more advanced techniques, you'll still be providing a better experience through your previous actions.

The spectrum flows from ensuring that content is navigable in the correct order by a keyboard to becoming compliant in the important web accessibility standards. There are many techniques to be learned. Each one builds off the previous and will still be creating a more equal experience for all of your users.

**TODO Graphic?**

## Getting Started is Easy

Accessibility can feel intimidating if you aren't familiar with the standards, rules, and techniques used to create accessible web content. I remember feeling overwhelmed by everything involved wit creating something that is accessible. Unfortunately, this left me afraid and I failed to act at all! I've since learned a few things that have made accessibility feel more accessible.

Much of the benefits can be achieved with easy-to-implement techniques. By thinking about accessibility while initially creating web content, it's even easier to ingrain equal access.

## JavaScript *is* Accessible

JavaScript is a dominating force on the web today. Not surprisingly, even people with disabilities have [JavaScript enabled][javascript-accessibility]. Using JavaScript does not preclude your content from being accessible. There are steps to take to ensure that your JavaScript does not prevent accessibility. However, these techniques are more focused on ensuring that dynamic content controlled by JavaScript is presented to all users.

## Guidelines Standards and Rules

When you're thinking about getting started with accessibility, there are rules defined to help standardize techniques. These techniques are captured in the [Web Content Accessibility Guidelines][wcag] (WCAG) and [Section 508 Standards][section-508]. Focusing on them while starting out can add confusion and create an intimidating experience, however it's important to understand the origin and purpose of these guidelines and standards. It's also important to revisit them throughout your journey.

### WCAG 2.0 - Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
[WCAG 2.0][wcag] exists as a set of 12 guidelines to ensure that content is accessible under [4 principles][wcag-principles]: *perceivable, operable, understandable, and robust*. Each guideline has testable success criteria defined to at [3 levels][wcag-levels] to differentiate importance and ease of implementation.

### Section 508 Standards
[Section 508][section-508] is a set of standards defined by the US government. It requires that all technology developed, procured, maintained, or used by the federal government be accessible to people with disabilities. This is a set of hard rules to be met to ensure accessibility.

[disabilities]: http://webaim.org/intro/#people
[ada-census]: https://www.census.gov/newsroom/facts-for-features/2015/cb15-ff10.html
[keyboard-accessibility]: http://webaim.org/techniques/keyboard/
[motor-accessibility]: http://webaim.org/articles/motor/
[semantic-accessibility]: http://webaim.org/techniques/semanticstructure/
[visual-accessibility]: http://webaim.org/articles/visual/
[cognitive-accessibility]: http://webaim.org/articles/cognitive/
[javascript-accessibility]: http://webaim.org/techniques/javascript/#reliance
[wcag]: https://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/wcag
[wcag-levels]: https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/conformance.html#uc-levels-head
[wcag-principles]: https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/intro.html#introduction-fourprincs-head
[section-508]: https://www.section508.gov/summary-section508-standards

Commit message:

Tweaks title of a11y post & adds graphic to break up text

app/posts/2017-04-03-the-a11y-for-all.md, after:

---
title: "Accessibility Is Usability"
subtitle: "How Accessibility Improvements Help Everyone"
author:
  name: "Sam Jones"
  url: "http://twitter.com/samjonester"
reddit: false
---

Our goal when creating an accessible experience is to ensure that users with [vision, auditory, motor, or cognitive disabilities][disabilities] are able to navigate all web content. Accessibility guidelines exist to eliminate barriers that would otherwise provide equal access to a [significant percentage][ada-census] of the population. The great thing about following accessibility guidelines is that techniques have an impact on **all** users. Getting started with accessibility is easy, and any action you take benefits users now!

## Accessibility Benefits Everyone

While accessibility techniques are extremely advantageous to people with disabilities, the techniques have a much wider impact. Here are some examples of how accessibility techniques can impact a much broader user base.

- Ensuring navigation is possible for users that are [unable to use a mouse][keyboard-accessibility] also means that power users are able to keep our hands planted on the keyboard.
- Increasing the size of touch targets to [support unsteady hands][motor-accessibility] also supports a one-handed parent who is trying to purchase your product while making a bottle.
- Using [semantic web elements][semantic-accessibility] to provide more context to screen readers also provides that same context to search engine spiders, and to the development team maintaining the content.
- Using contrast to convey differences in addition to color ensures that users with [visual disabilities][visual-accessibility] are able to discern content. It also means that users viewing the content on a phone in the sun can discern the content as well.
- Providing textual representations of audio and video content means that the content is searchable.
- Ensuring that text can be resized for users with [visual disabilities][visual-accessibility] means that it can also be shared during a meeting or within a screen share.

In addition to this list, improving accessibility specifically for users with [cognitive disabilities][cognitive-accessibility] has very wide-reaching value.
- Navigation that is simple and consistent makes content more discoverable to all users.
- Clear, focused, consistent messaging is valuable marketing.
- Avoiding distractions and using white space to focus attention creates a deeper and more memorable impression.


<figure>
  <h3 style="text-align: center;">The wide reaching nature of accessibility improvements.</h3>
  <img src="ms-inclusive-design.png" />
  <figcaption style="text-align: left;">
    A spectrum of permanent, temporary, and situational disabilities (credit: [Microsoft’s Inclusive Design](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/design/inclusive)).
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## Accessibility is a Continuum

>   Accessibility isn't a badge. It's not an item on a checklist.<br/>
>   Increasing usability through accessibility is a continuous process.

Have you held off on "adding accessibility" to a web site or UI component, for fear that you're not an accessibility expert? Don't hold back! Each action taken will have an impact. As you learn about more advanced techniques, you'll still be providing a better experience through your previous actions.

The spectrum flows from ensuring that content is navigable in the correct order by a keyboard to becoming compliant in the important web accessibility standards. There are many techniques to be learned. Each one builds off the previous and will still be creating a more equal experience for all of your users.

## Getting Started is Easy

Accessibility can feel intimidating if you aren't familiar with the standards, rules, and techniques used to create accessible web content. I remember feeling overwhelmed by everything involved wit creating something that is accessible. Unfortunately, this left me afraid and I failed to act at all! I've since learned a few things that have made accessibility feel more accessible.

Much of the benefits can be achieved with easy-to-implement techniques. By thinking about accessibility while initially creating web content, it's even easier to ingrain equal access.

## JavaScript *is* Accessible

JavaScript is a dominating force on the web today. Not surprisingly, even people with disabilities have [JavaScript enabled][javascript-accessibility]. Using JavaScript does not preclude your content from being accessible. There are steps to take to ensure that your JavaScript does not prevent accessibility. However, these techniques are more focused on ensuring that dynamic content controlled by JavaScript is presented to all users.

## Guidelines Standards and Rules

When you're thinking about getting started with accessibility, there are rules defined to help standardize techniques. These techniques are captured in the [Web Content Accessibility Guidelines][wcag] (WCAG) and [Section 508 Standards][section-508]. Focusing on them while starting out can add confusion and create an intimidating experience, however it's important to understand the origin and purpose of these guidelines and standards. It's also important to revisit them throughout your journey.

* [WCAG 2.0][wcag] exists as a set of 12 guidelines to ensure that content is accessible under [4 principles][wcag-principles]: *perceivable, operable, understandable, and robust*. Each guideline has testable success criteria defined to at [3 levels][wcag-levels] to differentiate importance and ease of implementation.
* [Section 508][section-508] is a set of standards defined by the US government. It requires that all technology developed, procured, maintained, or used by the federal government be accessible to people with disabilities.

[disabilities]: http://webaim.org/intro/#people
[ada-census]: https://www.census.gov/newsroom/facts-for-features/2015/cb15-ff10.html
[keyboard-accessibility]: http://webaim.org/techniques/keyboard/
[motor-accessibility]: http://webaim.org/articles/motor/
[semantic-accessibility]: http://webaim.org/techniques/semanticstructure/
[visual-accessibility]: http://webaim.org/articles/visual/
[cognitive-accessibility]: http://webaim.org/articles/cognitive/
[javascript-accessibility]: http://webaim.org/techniques/javascript/#reliance
[wcag]: https://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/wcag
[wcag-levels]: https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/conformance.html#uc-levels-head
[wcag-principles]: https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/intro.html#introduction-fourprincs-head
[section-508]: https://www.section508.gov/summary-section508-standards
